docs/pages/index.mdx, before:

import { Tabs } from "nextra-theme-docs";

# Convex Ents

Convex Ents are an ergonomic layer on top of the [Convex](https://convex.dev)
built-in [`ctx.db`](https://docs.convex.dev/database) API for reading from and
writing to the database.

Convex Ents:

1. Build upon the relational capabilities of the database to provide an easier
   way to query related documents.
2. Allow defining default values for easier document shape evolution.
3. Simplify backend code by collocating common authorization rules in a single
   place.
4. And more!

Convex Ents are loosely inspired by the powerful Ent framework developed at
Facebook. You can learn more about it in
[this YouTube video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nKp_LUFk8EU), and see its
open-source JS implementation at [ent.dev](https://ent.dev/).

Convex Ents provide similar capabilities to
[Prisma ORM](https://www.prisma.io/client), but target only Convex, and use
neither proprietary schema language nor SQL concepts nor code generation. Convex
Ents are a pure TypeScript/JavaScript library.

Check out [these code snippets](https://labs.convex.dev/convex-vs-prisma) for
comparison of Prisma, Convex and Convex Ents.

<Tabs items={["Example query", "mutation", "schema"]}>

<Tabs.Tab>

```ts filename="convex/teams.ts"
export const listTeamInvites = query({
  args: { teamId: v.id("teams") },
  async handler(ctx, { teamId }) {
    return await ctx
      .table("teams")
      .getX(teamId)
      .edge("invites")
      .map(async (invite) => ({
        _id: invite._id,
        email: invite.email,
        role: (await invite.edge("role")).name,
      })); // `{ _id: Id<"invites">, email: string, role: string }[]`
  },
});
```

</Tabs.Tab>
<Tabs.Tab>

```ts filename="convex/teams.ts"
export const acceptInvite = mutation({
  args: { inviteId: v.id("invites") },
  async handler(ctx, { inviteId }) {
    const invite = await ctx.table("invites").getX(inviteId);
    await ctx.table("members").insert({
      teamId: invite.teamId,
      userId: ctx.viewerX()._id,
      roleId: invite.roleId,
    });
    await invite.delete();
    return (await invite.edge("team")).slug;
  },
});
```

</Tabs.Tab>
<Tabs.Tab>

```ts filename="convex/schema.ts"
const schema = defineEntSchema({
  teams: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  })
    .field("slug", v.string(), { unique: true })
    .edges("members", { ref: true })
    .edges("invites", { ref: true }),

  members: defineEnt({}).edge("team").edge("user").edge("role"),

  invites: defineEnt({})
    .field("email", v.string(), { unique: true })
    .edge("team")
    .edge("role"),

  roles: defineEnt({
    isDefault: v.boolean(),
  }).field("name", v.union(v.literal("Admin"), v.literal("Member")), {
    unique: true,
  }),

  users: defineEnt({}).edges("members", { ref: true }),
});
```

</Tabs.Tab>
</Tabs>

## I'm intrigued, what now?

Check out the [Ent Schema](/schema) page to understand the improved data
modeling that Convex Ents enable, and the [Reading Ents](/read) and
[Writing Ents](/write) to see the more powerful interface to the database.

If you're sold, head over to [Setup](/setup) to get started.

Commit message:

Better examples on home page

docs/pages/index.mdx, after:

import { Tabs } from "nextra-theme-docs";

# Convex Ents

Convex Ents are an ergonomic layer on top of the [Convex](https://convex.dev)
built-in [`ctx.db`](https://docs.convex.dev/database) API for reading from and
writing to the database.

Convex Ents:

1. Build upon the relational capabilities of the database to provide an easier
   way to query related documents.
2. Allow defining default values for easier document shape evolution.
3. Simplify backend code by collocating common authorization rules in a single
   place.
4. And more!

Convex Ents are loosely inspired by the powerful Ent framework developed at
Facebook. You can learn more about it in
[this YouTube video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nKp_LUFk8EU), and see its
open-source JS implementation at [ent.dev](https://ent.dev/).

Convex Ents provide similar capabilities to
[Prisma ORM](https://www.prisma.io/client), but target only Convex, and use
neither proprietary schema language nor SQL concepts nor code generation. Convex
Ents are a pure TypeScript/JavaScript library.

## Examples

Check out [these code snippets](https://labs.convex.dev/convex-vs-prisma) for
comparison of Prisma, Convex and Convex Ents.

[SaaS Starter](https://github.com/xixixao/saas-starter) is a full project
template built out using Convex Ents.

<Tabs items={["Example query", "mutation", "schema"]}>

<Tabs.Tab>

```ts filename="convex/teams.ts"
export const listTeamInvites = query({
  args: { teamId: v.id("teams") },
  async handler(ctx, { teamId }) {
    return await ctx
      .table("teams")
      .getX(teamId)
      .edge("invites")
      .map(async (invite) => ({
        _id: invite._id,
        email: invite.email,
        role: (await invite.edge("role")).name,
      })); // `{ _id: Id<"invites">, email: string, role: string }[]`
  },
});
```

</Tabs.Tab>
<Tabs.Tab>

```ts filename="convex/teams.ts"
export const acceptInvite = mutation({
  args: { inviteId: v.id("invites") },
  async handler(ctx, { inviteId }) {
    const invite = await ctx.table("invites").getX(inviteId);
    await ctx.table("members").insert({
      teamId: invite.teamId,
      userId: ctx.viewerX()._id,
      roleId: invite.roleId,
    });
    await invite.delete();
    return (await invite.edge("team")).slug;
  },
});
```

</Tabs.Tab>
<Tabs.Tab>

```ts filename="convex/schema.ts"
const schema = defineEntSchema({
  teams: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  })
    .field("slug", v.string(), { unique: true })
    .edges("members", { ref: true })
    .edges("invites", { ref: true }),

  members: defineEnt({}).edge("team").edge("user").edge("role"),

  invites: defineEnt({})
    .field("email", v.string(), { unique: true })
    .edge("team")
    .edge("role"),

  roles: defineEnt({
    isDefault: v.boolean(),
  }).field("name", v.union(v.literal("Admin"), v.literal("Member")), {
    unique: true,
  }),

  users: defineEnt({}).edges("members", { ref: true }),
});
```

</Tabs.Tab>
</Tabs>

## I'm intrigued, what now?

Read the [Ent Schema](/schema) page to understand the improved data modeling
that Convex Ents enable, and the [Reading Ents](/read) and
[Writing Ents](/write) to see the more powerful interface to the database.

If you're sold, head over to [Setup](/setup) to get started.
