docs/pages/read.mdx, before:

import { Aside } from "../components/Aside.tsx";

# Reading Ents from the Database

Convex Ents provide a `ctx.table` method which replaces the built-in `ctx.db`
object in Convex [queries](https://docs.convex.dev/functions/query-functions).
The result of calling the method is a custom object which acts as a lazy
`Promise`. If you `await` it, you will get a list of results. But you can
instead call another method on it which will return a different lazy `Promise`,
and so on. This enables a powerful and efficient fluent API.

## Security

The Convex Ents API was designed to add an additional level of security to your
backend code. The built-in `ctx.db` object allows reading data from and writing
data to any table. Therefore in vanilla Convex you must correctly use both
[argument validation](https://docs.convex.dev/functions/args-validation) and
[strict schema validation](https://docs.convex.dev/database/schemas) to avoid
exposing a function which could be misused by an attacker to act on a table it
was not designed to act on.

All Convex Ents APIs require specifying a table up-front. If you need to read
data from an arbitrary table, you must the
[use the built-in `ctx.db`](/setup/config) object.

## Reading a single ent by ID

```ts
const task = await ctx.table("tasks").get(taskId);
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const task = await ctx.db.get(taskId);
```

with the addition of checking that `taskId` belongs to `"tasks"`.

</Aside>

## Reading a single ent by indexed field

```ts
const task = await ctx.table("users").get("email", "steve@apple.com");
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const task = await ctx.db
  .query("users")
  .withIndex("email", (q) => q.eq("email", "steve@apple.com"))
  .unique();
```

</Aside>

## Reading a single ent via a compound index

```ts
const task = await ctx.table("users").get("nameAndRank", "Steve", 10);
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const task = await ctx.db
  .query("users")
  .withIndex("nameAndRank", (q) => q.eq("name", "Steve").eq("rank", 10))
  .unique();
```

</Aside>

## Reading a single ent or throwing

The `getX` method (pronounced "get or throw") throws an `Error` if the read
produced no ents:

```ts
const task = await ctx.table("tasks").getX(taskId);
```

```ts
const task = await ctx.table("users").getX("email", "steve@apple.com");
```

## Reading multiple ents by IDs

Retrieve a list of ents or nulls:

```ts
const tasks = await ctx.table("tasks").getMany([taskId1, taskId2]);
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const task = await Promise.all([taskId1, taskId2].map(ctx.db.get));
```

</Aside>
## Reading multiple ents by IDs or throwing

Retrieve a list of ents or throw an `Error` if any of the IDs didn't map to an
existing ent:

```ts
const tasks = await ctx.table("tasks").getManyX([taskId1, taskId2]);
```

Also throws if any of the ents fail a [read rule](/schema/rules).

## Listing all ents

To list all ents backed by a single table, simply `await` the `ctx.table` call:

```ts
const tasks = await ctx.table("users");
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const tasks = await ctx.db.query("users").collect();
```

</Aside>

## Listing ents filtered by index

To list ents from a table and efficiently filter them by an index, pass the
index name and filter callback to `ctx.table`:

```ts
const posts = await ctx.table("posts", "numLikes", (q) =>
  q.gt("numLikes", 100),
);
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const posts = await ctx.db
  .query("posts")
  .withIndex("numLikes", (q) => q.gt("numLikes", 100))
  .collect();
```

</Aside>

## Filtering

Use the `filter` method, which works the same as the
[built-in `filter` method](https://docs.convex.dev/database/reading-data#filtering):

```ts
const posts = await ctx
  .table("posts")
  .filter((q) => q.gt(q.field("numLikes"), 100));
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const posts = await ctx.db
  .query("posts")
  .filter((q) => q.gt(q.field("numLikes"), 100))
  .collect();
```

</Aside>

## Ordering

Use the `order` method. The default sort is by `_creationTime` in ascending
order (from oldest created to newest created):

```ts
const posts = await ctx.table("posts").order("desc");
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const posts = await ctx.db.query("posts").order("desc").collect();
```

</Aside>

## Ordering by index

The `order` method takes an index name as a shortcut to sorting by a given
index:

```ts
const posts = await ctx.table("posts").order("desc", "numLikes");
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const posts = await ctx
  .table("posts")
  .withIndex("numLikes")
  .order("desc")
  .collect();
```

</Aside>

## Limiting results

### Taking first `n` ents

```ts
const users = await ctx.table("users").take(5);
```

### Loading a page of ents

The `paginate` method returns a page of ents. It takes the same argument object
as the [the built-in pagination](https://docs.convex.dev/database/pagination)
method.

```ts
const result = await ctx.table("posts").paginate(paginationOpts);
```

### Finding the first ent

Useful chained, either to a `ctx.table` call using an index, or after `filter`,
`order`, `edge`.

```ts
const latestUser = await ctx.table("users").order("desc").first();
```

### Finding the first ent or throwing

The `firstX` method (pronounced "first or throw") throws an `Error` if the read
produced no ents:

```ts
const latestUser = await ctx.table("users").order("desc").firstX();
```

### Finding a unique ent

Throws if the listing produced more than 1 result, returns `null` if there were
no results:

```ts
const counter = await ctx.table("counters").unique();
```

### Finding a unique ent or throwing

The `uniqueX` method (pronounced "unique or throw") throws if the listing
produced more or less than 1 result:

```ts
const counter = await ctx.table("counters").uniqueX();
```

## Accessing system tables

[System tables](https://docs.convex.dev/database/advanced/system-tables) can be
read with the `ctx.table.system` method:

```ts
const filesMetadata = await ctx.table.system("_storage");
const scheduledFunctions = await ctx.table.system("_scheduled_functions");
```

All the previously listed methods are also supported by `ctx.table.system`.
Edges to and from system tables are currently not supported.

## Traversing edges

Convex Ents allow easily traversing edges declared in the
[schema](/schema#edges) with the `edge` method.

### Traversing 1:1 edge

For 1:1 edges, the `edge` method returns:

- The ent required on the other end of the edge (ex: given a `profile`, load the
  `user`)
- The ent or `null` on the optional end of the edge (ex: given a `user`, load
  their `profile`)

```ts
const user = await ctx.table("profiles").getX(profileId).edge("user");
const profileOrNull = await ctx.table("users").getX(userId).edge("profile");
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const user = await ctx.db
  .query("users")
  .withIndex("profileId", (q) => q.eq("profileId", profileId))
  .unique();
```

</Aside>

The `edgeX` method (pronounced "edge or throw") throws if the edge does not
exist:

```ts
const profile = await ctx.table("users").getX(userId).edgeX("profile");
```

### Traversing 1:many edges

For 1:many edges, the `edge` method returns:

- The ent required on the other end of the edge (ex: given a `message`, load the
  `user`)
- A list of ents on the end of the multiple edges (ex: given a `user`, load all
  the `messages`)

```ts
const user = await ctx.table("message").getX(messageId).edge("user");
const messages = await ctx.table("users").getX(userId).edge("messages");
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const messages = await ctx.db
  .query("messages")
  .withIndex("userId", (q) => q.eq("userId", userId))
  .collect();
```

</Aside>

In the case where a list is returned, [filtering](#filtering),
[ordering](#ordering) and [limiting results](#limiting-results) applies and can
be used.

### Traversing many:many edges

For many:many edges, the `edge` method returns a list of ents on the other end
of the multiple edges:

```ts
const tags = await ctx.table("messages").getX(messageId).edge("tags");
const messages = await ctx.table("tags").getX(tagId).edge("messages");
```

### Testing many:many edge presence

You can efficiently test whether two ents are connected by a many:many edge
using the `has` method:

```ts
const hasTag = ctx.table("messages").getX(messageId).edge("tags").has(tagId);
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const hasTag =
  (await ctx.db
    .query("messages_to_tags")
    .withIndex("messagesId", (q) =>
      q.eq("messagesId", message._id).eq("tagsId", tagId),
    )
    .first()) !== null;
```

</Aside>

### Traversing edges on retrieved ents

All the methods for reading ents return the underlying document(s), enriched
with the `edge` and `edgeX` methods. This allows traversing edges even after
loading the ent from the database:

```ts
const user = await ctx.table("users").firstX();
const profile = user.edgeX("profile");
```

## Mapping ents

To map, that is to produce a new Array by calling a function on each element of
the original Array, using `async` functions is quite unwieldy in JavaScript
without the use of libraries. For this reason all lazy promises of a list of
ents support the `map` method:

```ts
const usersWithMessagesAndProfile = await ctx
  .table("users")
  .map(async (user) => ({
    name: user.name,
    messages: await user.edge("messages"),
    profile: await user.edgeX("profile"),
  }));
```

<Aside title="This code is equivalent to this code using only built-in Convex and JavaScript
functionality:">

```ts
const usersWithMessagesAndProfile = await Promise.all(
  (await ctx.db.query("users").collect()).map(async (user) => ({
    name: user.name,
    posts: await ctx.db
      .query("messages")
      .withIndex("userId", (q) => q.eq("userId", user._id))
      .collect(),
    profile: (async () => {
      const profile = await ctx.db
        .query("profiles")
        .withIndex("userId", (q) => q.eq("userId", user._id))
        .unique();
      if (profile === null) {
        throw new Error(
          `Edge "profile" does not exist for document wit ID "${user._id}"`,
        );
      }
      return profile;
    })(),
  })),
);
```

</Aside>

## Returning documents from functions

Consider the following query:

```ts filename="convex/messages.ts"
import { query } from "./functions";

export const list = query({
  args: {},
  handler: async (ctx) => {
    return await ctx.table("messages");
  },
});
```

It returns all ents stored in the `messages` table. Ents include methods which
are not preserved when they are returned to the client. While this works fine at
runtime, TypeScript will think that the methods are still available even on the
client.

Note that it is generally not a good idea to return full documents directly to
clients. If you add a new field to an ent, you might not want that field to be
sent to clients. For this reason, and for backwards compatibility in general,
it's a good idea to pick specifically which fields to send:

```ts filename="convex/messages.ts"
import { query } from "./functions";

export const list = query({
  args: {},
  handler: async (ctx) => {
    return await ctx.table("messages").map((message) => ({
      _id: message._id,
      _creationTime: message._creationTime,
      text: message.text,
      userId: message.userId,
    }));
  },
});
```

That said, you can easily retrieve raw documents, instead of ents with methods,
from the database using the `docs` and `doc` methods:

```ts filename="convex/messages.ts"
import { query } from "./functions";

export const list = query({
  args: {},
  handler: async (ctx) => {
    return await ctx.table("messages").docs();
  },
});
```

```ts filename="convex/users.ts"
import { query } from "./functions";

export const list = query({
  args: {},
  handler: async (ctx) => {
    const usersWithMessagesAndProfile = await ctx
      .table("users")
      .map(async (user) => ({
        ...user,
        messages: await user.edge("messages").docs(),
        profile: await user.edgeX("profile").doc(),
      }));
  },
});
```

You can also call the `doc` method on a retrieved ent, which returns the same
object, but is typed as a plain Convex document.

Commit message:

Document pagination and ordering for many:many edge traversal

docs/pages/read.mdx, after:

import { Aside } from "../components/Aside.tsx";

# Reading Ents from the Database

Convex Ents provide a `ctx.table` method which replaces the built-in `ctx.db`
object in Convex [queries](https://docs.convex.dev/functions/query-functions).
The result of calling the method is a custom object which acts as a lazy
`Promise`. If you `await` it, you will get a list of results. But you can
instead call another method on it which will return a different lazy `Promise`,
and so on. This enables a powerful and efficient fluent API.

## Security

The Convex Ents API was designed to add an additional level of security to your
backend code. The built-in `ctx.db` object allows reading data from and writing
data to any table. Therefore in vanilla Convex you must correctly use both
[argument validation](https://docs.convex.dev/functions/args-validation) and
[strict schema validation](https://docs.convex.dev/database/schemas) to avoid
exposing a function which could be misused by an attacker to act on a table it
was not designed to act on.

All Convex Ents APIs require specifying a table up-front. If you need to read
data from an arbitrary table, you must the
[use the built-in `ctx.db`](/setup/config) object.

## Reading a single ent by ID

```ts
const task = await ctx.table("tasks").get(taskId);
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const task = await ctx.db.get(taskId);
```

with the addition of checking that `taskId` belongs to `"tasks"`.

</Aside>

## Reading a single ent by indexed field

```ts
const task = await ctx.table("users").get("email", "steve@apple.com");
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const task = await ctx.db
  .query("users")
  .withIndex("email", (q) => q.eq("email", "steve@apple.com"))
  .unique();
```

</Aside>

## Reading a single ent via a compound index

```ts
const task = await ctx.table("users").get("nameAndRank", "Steve", 10);
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const task = await ctx.db
  .query("users")
  .withIndex("nameAndRank", (q) => q.eq("name", "Steve").eq("rank", 10))
  .unique();
```

</Aside>

## Reading a single ent or throwing

The `getX` method (pronounced "get or throw") throws an `Error` if the read
produced no ents:

```ts
const task = await ctx.table("tasks").getX(taskId);
```

```ts
const task = await ctx.table("users").getX("email", "steve@apple.com");
```

## Reading multiple ents by IDs

Retrieve a list of ents or nulls:

```ts
const tasks = await ctx.table("tasks").getMany([taskId1, taskId2]);
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const task = await Promise.all([taskId1, taskId2].map(ctx.db.get));
```

</Aside>
## Reading multiple ents by IDs or throwing

Retrieve a list of ents or throw an `Error` if any of the IDs didn't map to an
existing ent:

```ts
const tasks = await ctx.table("tasks").getManyX([taskId1, taskId2]);
```

Also throws if any of the ents fail a [read rule](/schema/rules).

## Listing all ents

To list all ents backed by a single table, simply `await` the `ctx.table` call:

```ts
const tasks = await ctx.table("users");
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const tasks = await ctx.db.query("users").collect();
```

</Aside>

## Listing ents filtered by index

To list ents from a table and efficiently filter them by an index, pass the
index name and filter callback to `ctx.table`:

```ts
const posts = await ctx.table("posts", "numLikes", (q) =>
  q.gt("numLikes", 100),
);
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const posts = await ctx.db
  .query("posts")
  .withIndex("numLikes", (q) => q.gt("numLikes", 100))
  .collect();
```

</Aside>

## Filtering

Use the `filter` method, which works the same as the
[built-in `filter` method](https://docs.convex.dev/database/reading-data#filtering):

```ts
const posts = await ctx
  .table("posts")
  .filter((q) => q.gt(q.field("numLikes"), 100));
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const posts = await ctx.db
  .query("posts")
  .filter((q) => q.gt(q.field("numLikes"), 100))
  .collect();
```

</Aside>

## Ordering

Use the `order` method. The default sort is by `_creationTime` in ascending
order (from oldest created to newest created):

```ts
const posts = await ctx.table("posts").order("desc");
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const posts = await ctx.db.query("posts").order("desc").collect();
```

</Aside>

## Ordering by index

The `order` method takes an index name as a shortcut to sorting by a given
index:

```ts
const posts = await ctx.table("posts").order("desc", "numLikes");
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const posts = await ctx
  .table("posts")
  .withIndex("numLikes")
  .order("desc")
  .collect();
```

</Aside>

## Limiting results

### Taking first `n` ents

```ts
const users = await ctx.table("users").take(5);
```

### Loading a page of ents

The `paginate` method returns a page of ents. It takes the same argument object
as the [the built-in pagination](https://docs.convex.dev/database/pagination)
method.

```ts
const result = await ctx.table("posts").paginate(paginationOpts);
```

### Finding the first ent

Useful chained, either to a `ctx.table` call using an index, or after `filter`,
`order`, `edge`.

```ts
const latestUser = await ctx.table("users").order("desc").first();
```

### Finding the first ent or throwing

The `firstX` method (pronounced "first or throw") throws an `Error` if the read
produced no ents:

```ts
const latestUser = await ctx.table("users").order("desc").firstX();
```

### Finding a unique ent

Throws if the listing produced more than 1 result, returns `null` if there were
no results:

```ts
const counter = await ctx.table("counters").unique();
```

### Finding a unique ent or throwing

The `uniqueX` method (pronounced "unique or throw") throws if the listing
produced more or less than 1 result:

```ts
const counter = await ctx.table("counters").uniqueX();
```

## Accessing system tables

[System tables](https://docs.convex.dev/database/advanced/system-tables) can be
read with the `ctx.table.system` method:

```ts
const filesMetadata = await ctx.table.system("_storage");
const scheduledFunctions = await ctx.table.system("_scheduled_functions");
```

All the previously listed methods are also supported by `ctx.table.system`.
Edges to and from system tables are currently not supported.

## Traversing edges

Convex Ents allow easily traversing edges declared in the
[schema](/schema#edges) with the `edge` method.

### Traversing 1:1 edge

For 1:1 edges, the `edge` method returns:

- The ent required on the other end of the edge (ex: given a `profile`, load the
  `user`)
- The ent or `null` on the optional end of the edge (ex: given a `user`, load
  their `profile`)

```ts
const user = await ctx.table("profiles").getX(profileId).edge("user");
const profileOrNull = await ctx.table("users").getX(userId).edge("profile");
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const user = await ctx.db
  .query("users")
  .withIndex("profileId", (q) => q.eq("profileId", profileId))
  .unique();
```

</Aside>

The `edgeX` method (pronounced "edge or throw") throws if the edge does not
exist:

```ts
const profile = await ctx.table("users").getX(userId).edgeX("profile");
```

### Traversing 1:many edges

For 1:many edges, the `edge` method returns:

- The ent required on the other end of the edge (ex: given a `message`, load the
  `user`)
- A list of ents on the end of the multiple edges (ex: given a `user`, load all
  the `messages`)

```ts
const user = await ctx.table("message").getX(messageId).edge("user");
const messages = await ctx.table("users").getX(userId).edge("messages");
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const messages = await ctx.db
  .query("messages")
  .withIndex("userId", (q) => q.eq("userId", userId))
  .collect();
```

</Aside>

In the case where a list is returned, [filtering](#filtering),
[ordering](#ordering) and [limiting results](#limiting-results) applies and can
be used.

### Traversing many:many edges

For many:many edges, the `edge` method returns a list of ents on the other end
of the multiple edges:

```ts
const tags = await ctx.table("messages").getX(messageId).edge("tags");
const messages = await ctx.table("tags").getX(tagId).edge("messages");
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const tags = await Promise.all(
  (
    await ctx.db
      .query("messages_to_tags")
      .withIndex("messagesId", (q) => q.eq("messagesId", messageId))
      .collect()
  ).map((edge) => ctx.db.get(edge.tagsId)),
);
```

</Aside>

The results are ordered by `_creationTime` of the edge, from oldest created to
newest created. The order can be changed with the [`order` method](#ordering)
and [the results can be limited](#limiting-results).

### Testing many:many edge presence

You can efficiently test whether two ents are connected by a many:many edge
using the `has` method:

```ts
const hasTag = ctx.table("messages").getX(messageId).edge("tags").has(tagId);
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const hasTag =
  (await ctx.db
    .query("messages_to_tags")
    .withIndex("messagesId-tagsId", (q) =>
      q.eq("messagesId", message._id).eq("tagsId", tagId),
    )
    .first()) !== null;
```

</Aside>

### Traversing edges on retrieved ents

All the methods for reading ents return the underlying document(s), enriched
with the `edge` and `edgeX` methods. This allows traversing edges even after
loading the ent from the database:

```ts
const user = await ctx.table("users").firstX();
const profile = user.edgeX("profile");
```

## Mapping ents

To map, that is to produce a new Array by calling a function on each element of
the original Array, using `async` functions is quite unwieldy in JavaScript
without the use of libraries. For this reason all lazy promises of a list of
ents support the `map` method:

```ts
const usersWithMessagesAndProfile = await ctx
  .table("users")
  .map(async (user) => ({
    name: user.name,
    messages: await user.edge("messages"),
    profile: await user.edgeX("profile"),
  }));
```

<Aside title="This code is equivalent to this code using only built-in Convex and JavaScript
functionality:">

```ts
const usersWithMessagesAndProfile = await Promise.all(
  (await ctx.db.query("users").collect()).map(async (user) => ({
    name: user.name,
    posts: await ctx.db
      .query("messages")
      .withIndex("userId", (q) => q.eq("userId", user._id))
      .collect(),
    profile: (async () => {
      const profile = await ctx.db
        .query("profiles")
        .withIndex("userId", (q) => q.eq("userId", user._id))
        .unique();
      if (profile === null) {
        throw new Error(
          `Edge "profile" does not exist for document wit ID "${user._id}"`,
        );
      }
      return profile;
    })(),
  })),
);
```

</Aside>

## Returning documents from functions

Consider the following query:

```ts filename="convex/messages.ts"
import { query } from "./functions";

export const list = query({
  args: {},
  handler: async (ctx) => {
    return await ctx.table("messages");
  },
});
```

It returns all ents stored in the `messages` table. Ents include methods which
are not preserved when they are returned to the client. While this works fine at
runtime, TypeScript will think that the methods are still available even on the
client.

Note that it is generally not a good idea to return full documents directly to
clients. If you add a new field to an ent, you might not want that field to be
sent to clients. For this reason, and for backwards compatibility in general,
it's a good idea to pick specifically which fields to send:

```ts filename="convex/messages.ts"
import { query } from "./functions";

export const list = query({
  args: {},
  handler: async (ctx) => {
    return await ctx.table("messages").map((message) => ({
      _id: message._id,
      _creationTime: message._creationTime,
      text: message.text,
      userId: message.userId,
    }));
  },
});
```

That said, you can easily retrieve raw documents, instead of ents with methods,
from the database using the `docs` and `doc` methods:

```ts filename="convex/messages.ts"
import { query } from "./functions";

export const list = query({
  args: {},
  handler: async (ctx) => {
    return await ctx.table("messages").docs();
  },
});
```

```ts filename="convex/users.ts"
import { query } from "./functions";

export const list = query({
  args: {},
  handler: async (ctx) => {
    const usersWithMessagesAndProfile = await ctx
      .table("users")
      .map(async (user) => ({
        ...user,
        messages: await user.edge("messages").docs(),
        profile: await user.edgeX("profile").doc(),
      }));
  },
});
```

You can also call the `doc` method on a retrieved ent, which returns the same
object, but is typed as a plain Convex document.
