docs/pages/schema.mdx, before:

import { Callout } from "nextra/components";
import edge from "../public/edge.png";
import edgeDark from "../public/edge-dark.png";
import edges from "../public/edges.png";
import edgesDark from "../public/edges-dark.png";
import edgesRef from "../public/edges.png";
import edgesRefDark from "../public/edges-ref-dark.png";
import edgesSelfAsymmetric from "../public/edges-self-asymmetric.png";
import edgesSelfAsymmetricDark from "../public/edges-self-asymmetric-dark.png";
import edgesSelfSymmetric from "../public/edges-self-symmetric.png";
import edgesSelfSymmetricDark from "../public/edges-self-symmetric-dark.png";
import { Graphic } from "../components/Graphic";

# Ent Schema

Ents (short for entity) are Convex documents, which allow explicitly declaring
edges (relationships) to other documents. The simplest ent has no fields besides
the built-in `_id` and `_creationTime` fields, and no declared edges. Ents can
contain all the same field types Convex documents can. Ents are stored in tables
in the Convex database.

Unlike bare documents, ents require a schema. Here's a minimal example of the
`convex/schema.ts` file using Ents:

```ts filename="convex/schema.ts"
import { v } from "convex/values";
import { defineEnt, defineEntSchema, getEntDefinitions } from "convex-ents";

const schema = defineEntSchema({
  messages: defineEnt({
    text: v.string(),
  }).edge("user"),

  users: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edges("messages", { ref: true }),
});

export default schema;

export const entDefinitions = getEntDefinitions(schema);
```

Compared to a [vanilla schema file](https://docs.convex.dev/database/schemas):

- `defineEntSchema` replaces `defineSchema` from `convex/server`
- `defineEnt` replaces `defineTable` from `convex/server`
- Besides exporting the `schema`, which is used by Convex for schema validation,
  you also export `entDefinitions`, which include the runtime information needed
  to enable retrieving Ents via edges and other features.

## Fields

An Ent field is a field in its backing document. Some types of [edges](#edges)
add additional fields not directly specified in the schema.

For Ents fields can be further configured.

### Indexed fields

`defineEnt` provides a shortcut for declaring a field and a simple index over
the field. Indexes allow efficient point and range lookups and efficient sorting
of the results by the indexed field. The following schema:

```ts
defineSchema({
  users: defineEnt({}).field("email", v.string(), { index: true }),
});
```

declares that "users" ents have one field, `"email"` of type `string`, and one
index called `"email"` over the `"email"` field. It is exactly equivalent to the
following schema:

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    email: v.string(),
  }).index("email", ["email"]),
});
```

### Unique fields

Similar to an indexed field, you can declare that a field must be unique in the
table. This comes at a cost: On every write to the backing a table, it must be
checked for an existing document with the same field value. Every unique field
is also an indexed field (as the index is used for an efficient lookup).

```ts
defineSchema({
  users: defineEnt({}).field("email", v.string(), { unique: true }),
});
```

### Field defaults

When evolving a schema, especially in production, the simplest way to modify the
shape of documents in the database is to add an optional field. Having an
optional field means that your code either always has to handle the "missing"
value case (the value is `undefined`), or you need to perform a careful
migration to backfill all the documents and set the field value.

Ents simplify this shape evolution by allowing to specify a default for a field.
The following schema:

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  posts: defineEnt({}).field(
    "contentType",
    v.union(v.literal("text"), v.literal("video")),
    { default: "text" },
  ),
});
```

declares that "posts" ents have one **required** field `"contentType"`,
containing a string, either `"text"` or `"video"`. When the value is missing
from the backing document, the default value `"text"` is returned. Without
specifying the default value, the schema could look like:

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  posts: defineEnt({
    contentType: v.optional(v.union(v.literal("text"), v.literal("video"))),
  }),
});
```

but for this schema the `contentType` field missing must be handled by the code
reading the ent.

## Edges

An edge is a representation of some business logic modelled by the database.
Some examples are:

- User A liking post X can be represented by an edge.
- User B authoring post Y can be represented by an edge.
- User C is friends with user D can be represented by an edge.

Every edge has two "ends", each being an Ent. Those Ents can be stored in the
same or in 2 different tables. Edges can represent symmetrical relationships.
The "friends with" edge is an example. If user C is friends with user D, then
user D is friends with user C. Symmetrical edge only make sense if both ends of
the edge point to Ents in the same table. Edges which are not symmetrical have
two names, one for each direction. For the user liking a post example, one
direction can be called "likedPosts" (from users to posts), the other "likers"
(from posts to users).

Edges can also declare how many Ents can be connected through the same edge. For
each end, there can be 0, 1 or many Ents connected to the same Ent on the other
side of the edge. For example, a user (represented by an Ent) has a profile
(represented by an Ent). In this case we call this a 1:1 edge. If we ask "how
many profiles does a user X have?" the answer is always 1. Similarly there can
be 1:many edges, such as a user with the messages they authored, when each
message has only a single author; and many:many edges, such as messages to tags,
where each message can have many tags, and each tag can be attached to many
messages.

Now that you understand all the properties of edges, here's how you can declare
them: Edges are always declared on the ents that constitute its ends. Let's take
the example of users authoring messages:

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edges("messages", { ref: true }),
  messages: defineEnt({
    text: v.string(),
  }).edge("user"),
});
```

In this example, the edge between "users" and "messages" is 1:many, each user
can have many associated messages, but each message has only a single associated
user. The syntax is explained below.

### Understanding how edges are stored

To further understand the ways in which edges can be declared, we need to
understand the difference in how they are stored. There are two ways edges are
stored in the database:

1. _Field edges_ are stored as a single foreign key column in one of the two
   connected tables. All 1:1 and 1:many edges are field edges.
2. _Table edges_ are stored as documents in a separate table. All many:many
   edges are table edges.

In the example above the edge is stored as an `Id<"users>` on the "messages"
document.

### 1:1 edges

1:1 edges are in a way a special case of 1:many edges. In Convex, one end of the
edge must be optional, because there is no way to "allocate" IDs before
documents are created (see
[circular references](https://docs.convex.dev/database/schemas#circular-references)).
Here's a basic example of a 1:1 edge, defined for each ent using the `edge`
(singular) method:

{/* TODO: Support optional on both sides, one side needs to choose to store the field */}

<Graphic src={edge} dark={edgeDark} alt="1:1 edges pictogram" />

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edge("profile", { optional: true }),
  profiles: defineEnt({
    bio: v.string(),
  }).edge("user"),
});
```

In this case, each user can have 1 profile, and each profile must have 1
associated user. This is a field edge stored on the "profiles" table as a
foreign key. The table that stores the edge is determined by the
`optional: true` option of the `edge` method - it's the table where the edge is
not optional.

This is the shortest syntax for declaring edges: based on the edge name "user",
the table on the other end is "users" (`s` is added) and the field storing the
edge is called "userId" (`Id` is added).

You can control the name of the field. This becomes necessary if you want to
have another field edge between the same pair of tables:

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edge("profile", { ref: "ownerId", optional: true }),
  profiles: defineEnt({
    bio: v.string(),
  }).edge("user", { field: "ownerId" }),
});
```

You have to provide the field name on both ends of the edge (via the `ref` and
`field` options respectively).

You can also specify explicitly which table is at the other end of the edge via
the `to` option. This way the edge name doesn't have match the table name (this
is helpful when the simple pluralization doesn't work, like edge "category" and
table "categories"):

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edge("info", { to: "profiles", ref: "ownerId", optional: true }),
  profiles: defineEnt({
    bio: v.string(),
  }).edge("owner", { to: "users", field: "ownerId" }),
});
```

The edge names are used when querying the edges, but they are not stored in the
database (the field name is, as part of each document that stores its value).

<Callout type="info">

Making both ends of the 1:1 edge optional is not supported for now.

In the example above, each profile must have an owner.

</Callout>

### 1:many edges

1:many edges are very common, and map clearly to foreign keys. Take this
example, where the edge is defined via the `edge` (singular) and `edges`
(plural) method:

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edges("messages", { ref: true }),
  messages: defineEnt({
    text: v.string(),
  }).edge("user"),
});
```

<Graphic src={edgesRef} dark={edgesRefDark} alt="1:many edge pictogram" />

This is a 1:many edge because the `edges` (plural) method is used on the "users"
ent and the `ref: true` option is specified. The `ref` option declares that the
edges are stored on a field in the other table. In this case each user can have
multiple associated messages. Just like for 1:1 edges, based on the edge name
"user", the table on the other end is "users" (`s` is added) and the field
storing the edge is called "userId" (`Id` is added).

You can control the name of the field. This becomes necessary if you want to
have another field edge between the same pair of tables:

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edges("messages", { ref: "authorId" }),
  messages: defineEnt({
    text: v.string(),
  }).edge("user", { field: "authorId" }),
});
```

You can also specify explicitly which table is at the other end of the edge via
the `to` option. This way the edge names don't have match the table name (this
is helpful when the simple pluralization doesn't work, like edge "category" and
table "categories"):

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edges("authoredMessages", { to: "messages", ref: "authorId" }),
  messages: defineEnt({
    text: v.string(),
  }).edge("author", { to: "users", field: "authorId" }),
});
```

<Callout type="info">

Making the singular end of the 1:many edge optional is not supported for now.

In the example above, each message must have an author.

</Callout>

### many:many edges

Many:many edges are always stored in a separate table, and both ends of the edge
use the `edges` (plural) method:

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  messages: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edges("tags"),
  tags: defineEnt({
    text: v.string(),
  }).edges("messages"),
});
```

<Graphic src={edges} dark={edgesDark} alt="many:many edge pictogram" />

In this case the table storing the edge is called `messages_to_tags`, based on
the tables storing each end of the edge.

You can control the name of the table storing the edges. This becomes necessary
if you want to have multiple edges connecting the same pair of tables:

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  messages: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edges("tags", { table: "messages_to_assignedTags" }),
  tags: defineEnt({
    text: v.string(),
  }).edges("messages", { table: "messages_to_assignedTags" }),
});
```

This table will have two ID fields, one for each end of the edge. Their names
will be inferred from the table names of the connected ents. You can specify
them explicitly using the `field` option:

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  messages: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edges("tags", { table: "messages_to_assignedTags", field: "messageId" }),
  tags: defineEnt({
    text: v.string(),
  }).edges("messages", {
    table: "messages_to_assignedTags",
    field: "assignedTagId",
  }),
});
```

You can also specify explicitly which table is at the other end of the edge via
the `to` option. This way the edge names don't have to match the table name
(this is helpful when the simple pluralization doesn't work, like edge
"category" and table "categories"):

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  messages: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edges("assignedTags", { to: "tags", table: "messages_to_assignedTags" }),
  tags: defineEnt({
    text: v.string(),
  }).edges("taggedMessages", {
    to: "messages",
    table: "messages_to_assignedTags",
  }),
});
```

#### Asymmetrical self-directed many:many edges

Self-directed edges have the ents on both ends of the edge stored in the same
table.

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edges("followers", { to: "users", inverse: "followees" }),
});
```

<Graphic
  src={edgesSelfAsymmetric}
  dark={edgesSelfAsymmetricDark}
  alt="many:many edge pictogram"
/>

Self-directed edges point to the same table on which they are defined via the
`to` option. For the edge to be asymmetrical, it has to specify the `inverse`
name. In this example, if this edge is between user A and user B, B is a
"followee" of A (is being followed by A), and A is a "follower" of B.

The table storing the edges is named after the edges, and so are its fields. You
can also specify the `table`, `field` and `inverseField` options to control how
the edge is stored and to allow multiple self-directed edges.

#### Symmetrical self-directed many:many edges

Symmetrical edges also have the ents on both ends of the edge stored in the same
table, but additionally they "double-write" the edge for both directions:

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edges("friends", { to: "users" }),
});
```

<Graphic
  src={edgesSelfSymmetric}
  dark={edgesSelfSymmetricDark}
  alt="many:many edge pictogram"
/>

By not specifying the `inverse` name, you're declaring the edge as symmetrical.
You can also specify the `table`, `field` and `inverseField` options to control
how the edge is stored and to allow multiple symmetrical self-directed edges.

Other kinds of edges are possible, but less common.

## Rules

Rules allow collocating the logic for when an ent can be created, read, updated
or deleted.

See the [Rules page](/schema/rules).

Commit message:

Add support for optional 1:1 edges

docs/pages/schema.mdx, after:

import { Callout } from "nextra/components";
import edge from "../public/edge.png";
import edgeDark from "../public/edge-dark.png";
import edges from "../public/edges.png";
import edgesDark from "../public/edges-dark.png";
import edgesRef from "../public/edges.png";
import edgesRefDark from "../public/edges-ref-dark.png";
import edgesSelfAsymmetric from "../public/edges-self-asymmetric.png";
import edgesSelfAsymmetricDark from "../public/edges-self-asymmetric-dark.png";
import edgesSelfSymmetric from "../public/edges-self-symmetric.png";
import edgesSelfSymmetricDark from "../public/edges-self-symmetric-dark.png";
import { Graphic } from "../components/Graphic";

# Ent Schema

Ents (short for entity) are Convex documents, which allow explicitly declaring
edges (relationships) to other documents. The simplest ent has no fields besides
the built-in `_id` and `_creationTime` fields, and no declared edges. Ents can
contain all the same field types Convex documents can. Ents are stored in tables
in the Convex database.

Unlike bare documents, ents require a schema. Here's a minimal example of the
`convex/schema.ts` file using Ents:

```ts filename="convex/schema.ts"
import { v } from "convex/values";
import { defineEnt, defineEntSchema, getEntDefinitions } from "convex-ents";

const schema = defineEntSchema({
  messages: defineEnt({
    text: v.string(),
  }).edge("user"),

  users: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edges("messages", { ref: true }),
});

export default schema;

export const entDefinitions = getEntDefinitions(schema);
```

Compared to a [vanilla schema file](https://docs.convex.dev/database/schemas):

- `defineEntSchema` replaces `defineSchema` from `convex/server`
- `defineEnt` replaces `defineTable` from `convex/server`
- Besides exporting the `schema`, which is used by Convex for schema validation,
  you also export `entDefinitions`, which include the runtime information needed
  to enable retrieving Ents via edges and other features.

## Fields

An Ent field is a field in its backing document. Some types of [edges](#edges)
add additional fields not directly specified in the schema.

For Ents fields can be further configured.

### Indexed fields

`defineEnt` provides a shortcut for declaring a field and a simple index over
the field. Indexes allow efficient point and range lookups and efficient sorting
of the results by the indexed field. The following schema:

```ts
defineSchema({
  users: defineEnt({}).field("email", v.string(), { index: true }),
});
```

declares that "users" ents have one field, `"email"` of type `string`, and one
index called `"email"` over the `"email"` field. It is exactly equivalent to the
following schema:

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    email: v.string(),
  }).index("email", ["email"]),
});
```

### Unique fields

Similar to an indexed field, you can declare that a field must be unique in the
table. This comes at a cost: On every write to the backing a table, it must be
checked for an existing document with the same field value. Every unique field
is also an indexed field (as the index is used for an efficient lookup).

```ts
defineSchema({
  users: defineEnt({}).field("email", v.string(), { unique: true }),
});
```

### Field defaults

When evolving a schema, especially in production, the simplest way to modify the
shape of documents in the database is to add an optional field. Having an
optional field means that your code either always has to handle the "missing"
value case (the value is `undefined`), or you need to perform a careful
migration to backfill all the documents and set the field value.

Ents simplify this shape evolution by allowing to specify a default for a field.
The following schema:

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  posts: defineEnt({}).field(
    "contentType",
    v.union(v.literal("text"), v.literal("video")),
    { default: "text" },
  ),
});
```

declares that "posts" ents have one **required** field `"contentType"`,
containing a string, either `"text"` or `"video"`. When the value is missing
from the backing document, the default value `"text"` is returned. Without
specifying the default value, the schema could look like:

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  posts: defineEnt({
    contentType: v.optional(v.union(v.literal("text"), v.literal("video"))),
  }),
});
```

but for this schema the `contentType` field missing must be handled by the code
reading the ent.

## Edges

An edge is a representation of some business logic modelled by the database.
Some examples are:

- User A liking post X can be represented by an edge.
- User B authoring post Y can be represented by an edge.
- User C is friends with user D can be represented by an edge.

Every edge has two "ends", each being an Ent. Those Ents can be stored in the
same or in 2 different tables. Edges can represent symmetrical relationships.
The "friends with" edge is an example. If user C is friends with user D, then
user D is friends with user C. Symmetrical edge only make sense if both ends of
the edge point to Ents in the same table. Edges which are not symmetrical have
two names, one for each direction. For the user liking a post example, one
direction can be called "likedPosts" (from users to posts), the other "likers"
(from posts to users).

Edges can also declare how many Ents can be connected through the same edge. For
each end, there can be 0, 1 or many Ents connected to the same Ent on the other
side of the edge. For example, a user (represented by an Ent) has a profile
(represented by an Ent). In this case we call this a 1:1 edge. If we ask "how
many profiles does a user X have?" the answer is always 1. Similarly there can
be 1:many edges, such as a user with the messages they authored, when each
message has only a single author; and many:many edges, such as messages to tags,
where each message can have many tags, and each tag can be attached to many
messages.

Now that you understand all the properties of edges, here's how you can declare
them: Edges are always declared on the ents that constitute its ends. Let's take
the example of users authoring messages:

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edges("messages", { ref: true }),
  messages: defineEnt({
    text: v.string(),
  }).edge("user"),
});
```

In this example, the edge between "users" and "messages" is 1:many, each user
can have many associated messages, but each message has only a single associated
user. The syntax is explained below.

### Understanding how edges are stored

To further understand the ways in which edges can be declared, we need to
understand the difference in how they are stored. There are two ways edges are
stored in the database:

1. _Field edges_ are stored as a single foreign key column in one of the two
   connected tables. All 1:1 and 1:many edges are field edges.
2. _Table edges_ are stored as documents in a separate table. All many:many
   edges are table edges.

In the example above the edge is stored as an `Id<"users>` on the "messages"
document.

### 1:1 edges

1:1 edges are in a way a special case of 1:many edges. In Convex, one end of the
edge must be optional, because there is no way to "allocate" IDs before
documents are created (see
[circular references](https://docs.convex.dev/database/schemas#circular-references)).
Here's a basic example of a 1:1 edge, defined for each ent using the `edge`
(singular) method:

{/* TODO: Support optional on both sides, one side needs to choose to store the field */}

<Graphic src={edge} dark={edgeDark} alt="1:1 edges pictogram" />

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edge("profile", { optional: true }),
  profiles: defineEnt({
    bio: v.string(),
  }).edge("user"),
});
```

In this case, each user can have 1 profile, and each profile must have 1
associated user. This is a field edge stored on the "profiles" table as a
foreign key. The table that stores the edge is determined by the
`optional: true` option of the `edge` method - it's the table where the edge is
not optional.

This is the shortest syntax for declaring edges: based on the edge name "user",
the table on the other end is "users" (`s` is added) and the field storing the
edge is called "userId" (`Id` is added).

You can control the name of the field. This becomes necessary if you want to
have another field edge between the same pair of tables:

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edge("profile", { ref: "ownerId", optional: true }),
  profiles: defineEnt({
    bio: v.string(),
  }).edge("user", { field: "ownerId" }),
});
```

You have to provide the field name on both ends of the edge (via the `ref` and
`field` options respectively).

You can also specify explicitly which table is at the other end of the edge via
the `to` option. This way the edge name doesn't have match the table name (this
is helpful when the simple pluralization doesn't work, like edge "category" and
table "categories"):

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edge("info", { to: "profiles", ref: "ownerId", optional: true }),
  profiles: defineEnt({
    bio: v.string(),
  }).edge("owner", { to: "users", field: "ownerId" }),
});
```

The edge names are used when querying the edges, but they are not stored in the
database (the field name is, as part of each document that stores its value).

#### Optional 1:1 edges

You can make both ends of a 1:1 edge optional:

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edge("profile", { ref: "userId", optional: true }),
  profiles: defineEnt({
    bio: v.string(),
  }).edge("user", { field: "userId", optional: true }),
});
```

In this case a profile can be created without a set `userId`.

You have to set the `ref` and `field` options to determine which side of the
edge stores it.

### 1:many edges

1:many edges are very common, and map clearly to foreign keys. Take this
example, where the edge is defined via the `edge` (singular) and `edges`
(plural) method:

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edges("messages", { ref: true }),
  messages: defineEnt({
    text: v.string(),
  }).edge("user"),
});
```

<Graphic src={edgesRef} dark={edgesRefDark} alt="1:many edge pictogram" />

This is a 1:many edge because the `edges` (plural) method is used on the "users"
ent and the `ref: true` option is specified. The `ref` option declares that the
edges are stored on a field in the other table. In this case each user can have
multiple associated messages. Just like for 1:1 edges, based on the edge name
"user", the table on the other end is "users" (`s` is added) and the field
storing the edge is called "userId" (`Id` is added).

You can control the name of the field. This becomes necessary if you want to
have another field edge between the same pair of tables:

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edges("messages", { ref: "authorId" }),
  messages: defineEnt({
    text: v.string(),
  }).edge("user", { field: "authorId" }),
});
```

You can also specify explicitly which table is at the other end of the edge via
the `to` option. This way the edge names don't have match the table name (this
is helpful when the simple pluralization doesn't work, like edge "category" and
table "categories"):

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edges("authoredMessages", { to: "messages", ref: "authorId" }),
  messages: defineEnt({
    text: v.string(),
  }).edge("author", { to: "users", field: "authorId" }),
});
```

<Callout type="info">

Making the singular end of the 1:many edge optional is not supported for now.

In the example above, each message must have an author.

</Callout>

### many:many edges

Many:many edges are always stored in a separate table, and both ends of the edge
use the `edges` (plural) method:

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  messages: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edges("tags"),
  tags: defineEnt({
    text: v.string(),
  }).edges("messages"),
});
```

<Graphic src={edges} dark={edgesDark} alt="many:many edge pictogram" />

In this case the table storing the edge is called `messages_to_tags`, based on
the tables storing each end of the edge.

You can control the name of the table storing the edges. This becomes necessary
if you want to have multiple edges connecting the same pair of tables:

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  messages: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edges("tags", { table: "messages_to_assignedTags" }),
  tags: defineEnt({
    text: v.string(),
  }).edges("messages", { table: "messages_to_assignedTags" }),
});
```

This table will have two ID fields, one for each end of the edge. Their names
will be inferred from the table names of the connected ents. You can specify
them explicitly using the `field` option:

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  messages: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edges("tags", { table: "messages_to_assignedTags", field: "messageId" }),
  tags: defineEnt({
    text: v.string(),
  }).edges("messages", {
    table: "messages_to_assignedTags",
    field: "assignedTagId",
  }),
});
```

You can also specify explicitly which table is at the other end of the edge via
the `to` option. This way the edge names don't have to match the table name
(this is helpful when the simple pluralization doesn't work, like edge
"category" and table "categories"):

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  messages: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edges("assignedTags", { to: "tags", table: "messages_to_assignedTags" }),
  tags: defineEnt({
    text: v.string(),
  }).edges("taggedMessages", {
    to: "messages",
    table: "messages_to_assignedTags",
  }),
});
```

#### Asymmetrical self-directed many:many edges

Self-directed edges have the ents on both ends of the edge stored in the same
table.

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edges("followers", { to: "users", inverse: "followees" }),
});
```

<Graphic
  src={edgesSelfAsymmetric}
  dark={edgesSelfAsymmetricDark}
  alt="many:many edge pictogram"
/>

Self-directed edges point to the same table on which they are defined via the
`to` option. For the edge to be asymmetrical, it has to specify the `inverse`
name. In this example, if this edge is between user A and user B, B is a
"followee" of A (is being followed by A), and A is a "follower" of B.

The table storing the edges is named after the edges, and so are its fields. You
can also specify the `table`, `field` and `inverseField` options to control how
the edge is stored and to allow multiple self-directed edges.

#### Symmetrical self-directed many:many edges

Symmetrical edges also have the ents on both ends of the edge stored in the same
table, but additionally they "double-write" the edge for both directions:

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edges("friends", { to: "users" }),
});
```

<Graphic
  src={edgesSelfSymmetric}
  dark={edgesSelfSymmetricDark}
  alt="many:many edge pictogram"
/>

By not specifying the `inverse` name, you're declaring the edge as symmetrical.
You can also specify the `table`, `field` and `inverseField` options to control
how the edge is stored and to allow multiple symmetrical self-directed edges.

Other kinds of edges are possible, but less common.

## Rules

Rules allow collocating the logic for when an ent can be created, read, updated
or deleted.

See the [Rules page](/schema/rules).
