docs/pages/write.mdx, before:

import { Aside } from "../components/Aside.tsx";

# Writing Ents to the Database

Just like for [reading](/read) ents from the database, for writing Convex Ents
provide a `ctx.table` method which replaces the built-in `ctx.db` object in
[Convex mutations](https://docs.convex.dev/functions/mutation-functions).

## Security

The same [added level of security](/read#security) applies to the writing ents
as it does to reading them.

## Inserting a new ent

You can insert new ents into the database with the `insert` method chained to
the result of calling `ctx.table`:

```ts
const taskId = await ctx.table("tasks").insert({ text: "Win at life" });
```

You can retrieve the just created ent with the `get` method:

```ts
const task = await ctx.table("tasks").insert({ text: "Win at life" }).get();
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const taskId = await ctx.db.insert("tasks", { text: "Win at life" });
const task = (await ctx.db.get(taskId))!;
```

</Aside>

## Inserting many new ents

```ts
const taskIds = await ctx
  .table("tasks")
  .insertMany({ text: "Buy socks" }, { text: "Buy socks" });
```

## Updating existing ents

To update an existing ent, call the `patch` or `replace` method on a
[lazy `Promise`](/read) of an ent, or on an already retrieved ent:

```ts
await ctx.table("tasks").getX(taskId).patch({ text: "Changed text" });
await ctx.table("tasks").getX(taskId).replace({ text: "Changed text" });
```

```ts
const task = await ctx.table("tasks").getX(taskId);
await task.patch({ text: "Changed text" });
await task.replace({ text: "Changed text" });
```

See the
[docs for the built-in `patch` and `replace` methods](https://docs.convex.dev/database/writing-data#updating-existing-documents)
for the difference between them.

## Deleting ents

To delete an ent, call the `delete` method on a [lazy `Promise`](/read) of an
ent, or on an already retrieved ent:

```ts
await ctx.table("tasks").getX(taskId).delete();
```

```ts
const task = await ctx.table("tasks").getX(taskId);
await task.delete();
```

### Cascading deletes

See the [Cascading Deletes](/schema/deletes) page for how to configure how
deleting an ent affects its edges and other ents connected to it.

## Creating edges

Edges can be created together with ents using the `insert` and `insertMany`
methods, or they can be created for two existing ents using the `replace` and
`patch` methods.

### Creating 1:1 and 1:many edges

A 1:1 or 1:many edge can be created by specifying the ID of the other ent on
[the ent which stores the edge](/schema#understanding-how-edges-are-stored),
either when inserting:

```ts
// First we need a user, which can have an optional profile edge
const userId = await ctx.table("users").insert({ name: "Alice" });
// Now we can create a profile with the 1:1 edge to the user
const profileId = await ctx
  .table("profiles")
  .insert({ bio: "In Wonderland", userId });
```

or when updating:

```ts
const profileId = await ctx.table("profiles").getX(profileId).patch({ userId });
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const posts = await ctx.db.patch(profileId, { userId });
```

with the addition of checking that `profileId` belongs to `"profiles"`.

</Aside>

### Creating many:many edges

Many:many edges can be created by listing the IDs of the other ents when
inserting ents on either side of the edge:

```ts
// First we need a tag, which can have many:many edge to messages
const tagId = await ctx.table("tags").insert({ name: "Blue" });
// Now we can create a message with a many:many edge to the tag
const messageId = await ctx
  .table("messages")
  .insert({ text: "Hello world", tags: [tagId] });
```

But we could have equally created a message first, and then created a tag with a
list of message IDs.

The `replace` method also expects a list of IDs:

```ts
await ctx
  .table("messages")
  .getX(messageId)
  .replace({ text: "Changed message", tags: [tagID, otherTagID] });
```

Because `replace` essentially behaves like a `delete` + `insert` but preserves
the `_id` and `_creationTime` fields of the replaced ent, any edges which are
not listed will be deleted.

The `patch` method on the other hand expects a description of the changes that
should be made, a list of IDs to `add` and `remove` edges for:

```ts
const message = await ctx.table("messages").getX(messageId);
await message.patch({ tags: { add: [tagID] } });
await message.patch({
  tags: { add: [tagID, otherTagID], remove: [tagToDeleteID] },
});
```

Any edges in the `add` list that didn't exist are created, and any edges in the
`remove` list that did exist are deleted. Edges to ents with ID not listed in
either list are not affected by `patch`.

## Updating ents connected by edges

The `patch`, `replace` and `delete` methods can be chained after `edge` calls to
update the ent on the other end of an edge:

```ts
await ctx
  .table("users")
  .getX(userId)
  .edgeX("profile")
  .patch({ bio: "I'm the first user" });
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const profile = await ctx.db
  .query("profiles")
  .withIndex("userId", (q) => q.eq("userId", userId))
  .unique();
if (profile === null) {
  throw new Error(
    `Edge "profile" does not exist for document wit ID "${userId}"`,
  );
}
await ctx.db.patch(profile._id, { bio: "I'm the first user" });
```

</Aside>

<Aside
  title={
    <>
      <b>Limitation:</b>&nbsp;<code>edge</code>&nbsp;called on a loaded ent
    </>
  }
>
The following code does not typecheck [currently](https://github.com/xixixao/convex-ents/issues/8):

```ts
const user = await ctx.table("users").getX(userId);
await user.edgeX("profile").patch({ bio: "I'm the first user" });
```

You can either disable typechecking via `// @ts-expect-error` or preferably
start with `ctx.table`:

```ts
const user = ... // loaded or passed via `map`
await ctx
  .table("users")
  .getX(user._id).edgeX("profile").patch({ bio: "I'm the first user" });
```

</Aside>

Commit message:

Breaking: Replace doesnt erase edges that arent listed

docs/pages/write.mdx, after:

import { Aside } from "../components/Aside.tsx";

# Writing Ents to the Database

Just like for [reading](/read) ents from the database, for writing Convex Ents
provide a `ctx.table` method which replaces the built-in `ctx.db` object in
[Convex mutations](https://docs.convex.dev/functions/mutation-functions).

## Security

The same [added level of security](/read#security) applies to the writing ents
as it does to reading them.

## Inserting a new ent

You can insert new ents into the database with the `insert` method chained to
the result of calling `ctx.table`:

```ts
const taskId = await ctx.table("tasks").insert({ text: "Win at life" });
```

You can retrieve the just created ent with the `get` method:

```ts
const task = await ctx.table("tasks").insert({ text: "Win at life" }).get();
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const taskId = await ctx.db.insert("tasks", { text: "Win at life" });
const task = (await ctx.db.get(taskId))!;
```

</Aside>

## Inserting many new ents

```ts
const taskIds = await ctx
  .table("tasks")
  .insertMany({ text: "Buy socks" }, { text: "Buy socks" });
```

## Updating existing ents

To update an existing ent, call the `patch` or `replace` method on a
[lazy `Promise`](/read) of an ent, or on an already retrieved ent:

```ts
await ctx.table("tasks").getX(taskId).patch({ text: "Changed text" });
await ctx.table("tasks").getX(taskId).replace({ text: "Changed text" });
```

```ts
const task = await ctx.table("tasks").getX(taskId);
await task.patch({ text: "Changed text" });
await task.replace({ text: "Changed text" });
```

See the
[docs for the built-in `patch` and `replace` methods](https://docs.convex.dev/database/writing-data#updating-existing-documents)
for the difference between them.

## Deleting ents

To delete an ent, call the `delete` method on a [lazy `Promise`](/read) of an
ent, or on an already retrieved ent:

```ts
await ctx.table("tasks").getX(taskId).delete();
```

```ts
const task = await ctx.table("tasks").getX(taskId);
await task.delete();
```

### Cascading deletes

See the [Cascading Deletes](/schema/deletes) page for how to configure how
deleting an ent affects its edges and other ents connected to it.

## Writing edges

Edges can be created together with ents using the `insert` and `insertMany`
methods, or they can be created and deleted for two existing ents using the
`replace` and `patch` methods.

### Writing 1:1 and 1:many edges

A 1:1 or 1:many edge can be created by specifying the ID of the other ent on
[the ent which stores the edge](/schema#understanding-how-edges-are-stored),
either when inserting:

```ts
// First we need a user, which can have an optional profile edge
const userId = await ctx.table("users").insert({ name: "Alice" });
// Now we can create a profile with the 1:1 edge to the user
const profileId = await ctx
  .table("profiles")
  .insert({ bio: "In Wonderland", userId });
```

or when updating:

```ts
const profileId = await ctx.table("profiles").getX(profileId).patch({ userId });
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const posts = await ctx.db.patch(profileId, { userId });
```

with the addition of checking that `profileId` belongs to `"profiles"`.

</Aside>

### Writing many:many edges

Many:many edges can be created by listing the IDs of the other ents when
inserting ents on either side of the edge:

```ts
// First we need a tag, which can have many:many edge to messages
const tagId = await ctx.table("tags").insert({ name: "Blue" });
// Now we can create a message with a many:many edge to the tag
const messageId = await ctx
  .table("messages")
  .insert({ text: "Hello world", tags: [tagId] });
```

But we could have equally created a message first, and then created a tag with a
list of message IDs.

The `replace` method can be used to create and delete many:many edges:

```ts
await ctx
  .table("messages")
  .getX(messageId)
  .replace({ text: "Changed message", tags: [tagID, otherTagID] });
```

If a list is specified, the edges that need to be created are created, and all
other existing edges are deleted. If the edge name is ommited entirely, the
edges are left unchanged:

```ts
await ctx
  .table("messages")
  .getX(messageId)
  .replace({ text: "Changed message" /* no `tags:`, so tags don't change */ });
```

The `patch` method on the other hand expects a description of the changes that
should be made, a list of IDs to `add` and `remove` edges for:

```ts
const message = await ctx.table("messages").getX(messageId);
await message.patch({ tags: { add: [tagID] } });
await message.patch({
  tags: { add: [tagID, otherTagID], remove: [tagToDeleteID] },
});
```

Any edges in the `add` list that didn't exist are created, and any edges in the
`remove` list that did exist are deleted. Edges to ents with ID not listed in
either list are not affected by `patch`.

## Updating ents connected by edges

The `patch`, `replace` and `delete` methods can be chained after `edge` calls to
update the ent on the other end of an edge:

```ts
await ctx
  .table("users")
  .getX(userId)
  .edgeX("profile")
  .patch({ bio: "I'm the first user" });
```

<Aside title="This is equivalent to the built-in:">

```ts
const profile = await ctx.db
  .query("profiles")
  .withIndex("userId", (q) => q.eq("userId", userId))
  .unique();
if (profile === null) {
  throw new Error(
    `Edge "profile" does not exist for document wit ID "${userId}"`,
  );
}
await ctx.db.patch(profile._id, { bio: "I'm the first user" });
```

</Aside>

<Aside
  title={
    <>
      <b>Limitation:</b>&nbsp;<code>edge</code>&nbsp;called on a loaded ent
    </>
  }
>
The following code does not typecheck [currently](https://github.com/xixixao/convex-ents/issues/8):

```ts
const user = await ctx.table("users").getX(userId);
await user.edgeX("profile").patch({ bio: "I'm the first user" });
```

You can either disable typechecking via `// @ts-expect-error` or preferably
start with `ctx.table`:

```ts
const user = ... // loaded or passed via `map`
await ctx
  .table("users")
  .getX(user._id).edgeX("profile").patch({ bio: "I'm the first user" });
```

</Aside>
