docs/pages/schema/deletes.mdx, before:

import { Aside } from "../../components/Aside.tsx";

# Cascading Deletes

Convex Ents are designed to simplify the creation of interconnected graphs of
documents in the database. Deleting ents connected through edges poses three
main challenges:

1. Propagating deletion across edges. When an ent is required on one end of an
   edge, and it is deleted, the edge and potentially the ent on the other end
   must be deleted as well.

   > Example: Consider an app with "teams" of "users". When a team is deleted,
   > its members, projects and other data belonging to the team should be
   > deleted as well.

2. Handling the volume of deleted documents. It is not possible to instantly
   erase a very large number of documents, from any database. Eventually there
   can be too many documents to delete, especially inside a single transaction.

   > Example: A team can have thousands of members and tens of thousands of
   > projects. These cannot all be deleted instantly.

3. Soft deleting and retaining data before final deletion. Often the data should
   not be immediately erased from the database.

   > Example: A team admin can delete a team, but you want to have the ability
   > to easily reinstate their data, in case the admin changes their mind, or
   > the request was fradulent.

   > Example: A user can leave a team and later rejoin it, reacquiring
   > attribution to data that was previously connected to them.

## Default deletion behavior

Without any additional configuration, ents and their edges are deleted
immediately. We'll also refer to this as "hard" deleted.

If the edge is required, as is the case for 1:many and 1:1 edges for the
[ents storing the edge as a field](/schema#understanding-how-edges-are-stored),
the ents on the other side of the edge are deleted as well.

The following scenarios are currently supported:

- 1:1 edge between ent A and ent B, ents A store the edge.
  - When ent A is deleted, only _it_ is deleted.
  - When ent B is deleted, the ent A connected to it is deleted as well (which
    might cause more edge and ent deletions).
- 1:many edge between ent A and ent B, ents A store the edge.
  - When ent A is deleted, only _it_ is deleted.
  - When ent B is deleted, ents A connected to it are deleted as well (which
    might cause more edge and ent deletions).
- many:many edge between ent A and ent B.
  - When ent A is deleted, the documents storing the edges to ents B are all
    deleted, but ents B are _not_ deleted.
  - When ent B is deleted, the documents storing the edges to ents A are all
    deleted, but ents A are _not_ deleted.

## Soft deletion behavior

You can configure an ent to use the `"soft"` deletion behavior with the
`deletion` method in your schema:

```ts
defineSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).deletion("soft"),
});
```

This behavior adds a `deletionTime` field to the ent. When the ent itself is
"deleted", via the `delete` method, the `deletionTime` field is set to the
current server time.

If the ent is being deleted as a result of cascading hard deletion, it is hard
deleted.

You can include or exclude soft deleted ents from results by filtering.

### Undeleting soft deleted ents

The ents can be "undeleted" by unsetting the `deletionTime` field, for example:

```ts
await ctx.table("users").getX(userId).patch({ deletionTime: undefined });
```

### Soft edge deletion

#### 1:1 and 1:many edges

By default soft deletion doesn't propagate. You can configure cascading deletes
for soft deletions for individual 1:1 and 1:many edges via the `deletion` option
on edge declarations:

```ts
defineSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    email: v.string(),
  })
    .deletion("soft")
    .edges("profiles", { ref: true, deletion: "soft" }),

  profiles: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  })
    .deletion("soft")
    .edge("user"),
});
```

The ent on the other end of the edge has to have the `"soft"` deletion behavior.

In this example, when a user is deleted, it is soft deleted, and all its
profiles are also soft deleted immediately. When a profile itself is deleted, it
is also only soft deleted.

Soft deletion of edges happens immediately, within the same transaction.

<Aside title="What if an ent has too many 1:many edges to soft delete immediately?">

If an ent is connected to a large number of other ents, such that propagating
soft deletion to them all could fail the mutation, you should instead filter out
the soft deleted ents after traversing the edge.

</Aside>

#### many:many edges

Soft deletion doesn't affect many:many edges.

## Scheduled deletion behavior

The scheduled deletion behavior expands on the soft deletion behavior. The ent
is first immediately soft deleted. An actual hard deletion is then scheduled.

### Additional configuration

To enable scheduled ent deletion you need to add two lines of code to your
[`functions.ts` file](/setup/config):

```ts
// Add this import
import { scheduledDeleteFactory } from "convex-ents/deletion";

// Add this export
export const scheduledDelete = scheduledDeleteFactory(entDefinitions);
```

This will expose an internal Convex mutation used by `ctx.table` when scheduling
deletions.

<Aside title="Alternatively, you can configure the mutation explicitly">

Expose the mutation somewhere in your `convex` folder, and its reference to the
factory function:

```ts filename="convex/someFileName.ts"
import { scheduledDeleteFactory } from "convex-ents/deletion";
import { entDefinitions } from "./schema";

export const myNameForScheduledDelete = scheduledDeleteFactory(entDefinitions, {
  scheduledDelete: internal.someFileName.myNameForScheduledDelete,
});
```

Also pass the function's reference in `functions.ts` file, wherever you set up
your custom `mutation` and `internalMutation` function constructors:

```ts filename="convex/functions.ts" {14, 40-42, 52-54}
import {
  customCtx,
  customMutation,
  customQuery,
} from "convex-helpers/server/customFunctions";
import {
  query as baseQuery,
  mutation as baseMutation,
  internalQuery as baseInternalQuery,
  internalMutation as baseInternalMutation,
} from "./_generated/server";
import { entsTableFactory } from "convex-ents";
import { entDefinitions } from "./schema";
import { internal } from "./_generated/api";

export const query = customQuery(
  baseQuery,
  customCtx(async (ctx) => {
    return {
      table: entsTableFactory(ctx, entDefinitions),
      db: undefined,
    };
  })
);

export const internalQuery = customQuery(
  baseInternalQuery,
  customCtx(async (ctx) => {
    return {
      table: entsTableFactory(ctx, entDefinitions),
      db: undefined,
    };
  })
);

export const mutation = customMutation(
  baseMutation,
  customCtx(async (ctx) => {
    return {
      table: entsTableFactory(ctx, entDefinitions, {
        scheduledDelete: internal.someFileName.myNameForScheduledDelete,
      }),
      db: undefined,
    };
  })
);

export const internalMutation = customMutation(
  baseInternalMutation,
  customCtx(async (ctx) => {
    return {
      table: entsTableFactory(ctx, entDefinitions, {
        scheduledDelete: internal.someFileName.myNameForScheduledDelete,
      }),
      db: undefined,
    };
  })
);
```

</Aside>

### Defining scheduled deletion behavior

You can configure an ent to use the `"scheduled"` deletion behavior with the
`deletion` method in your schema:

```ts
defineSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    email: v.string(),
  })
    .deletion("scheduled")
    .edges("profiles", { ref: true }),

  profiles: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edge("user"),
});
```

When the ent is deleted, it is first soft deleted.
[Soft edge deletion](#soft-edge-deletion) can apply as well. This all happens
within the same mutation.

The hard deletion is scheduled to a separate mutation/mutations. Cascading
deletes are performed first, then the ent itself is hard deleted. There is no
guarantee on how long this can take, as it depends on the number of documents
that need to be deleted to finish the cascading deletion.

The hard deletion can be delayed into the future with the `delayMs` option:

```ts
defineSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    email: v.string(),
  })
    .deletion("scheduled", { delayMs: 24 * 60 * 60 * 1000 })
    .edges("profiles", { ref: true }),

  profiles: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edge("user"),
});
```

In this example the user ent is soft deleted first, then after 24 hours its
profiles and the user itself are hard deleted.

The delay is only applied if the ent is itself being deleted, not when it is
being deleted as a result of a cascading delete.

### Canceling scheduled deletion

You can cancel a scheduled deletion by unsetting the `deletionTime` field, for
example:

```ts
await ctx.table("users").getX(userId).patch({ deletionTime: undefined });
```

### Correctness

You should make sure that while a scheduled hard deletion is running, there are
no new ents being inserted that would also be eligible for the same cascading
deletion.

You can do this by checking for the soft deletion state of the deleted ent in
your code.

Commit message:

Support 1:1 edges to file storage and scheduled functions

docs/pages/schema/deletes.mdx, after:

import { Aside } from "../../components/Aside.tsx";

# Cascading Deletes

Convex Ents are designed to simplify the creation of interconnected graphs of
documents in the database. Deleting ents connected through edges poses three
main challenges:

1. Propagating deletion across edges. When an ent is required on one end of an
   edge, and it is deleted, the edge and potentially the ent on the other end
   must be deleted as well.

   > Example: Consider an app with "teams" of "users". When a team is deleted,
   > its members, projects and other data belonging to the team should be
   > deleted as well.

2. Handling the volume of deleted documents. It is not possible to instantly
   erase a very large number of documents, from any database. Eventually there
   can be too many documents to delete, especially inside a single transaction.

   > Example: A team can have thousands of members and tens of thousands of
   > projects. These cannot all be deleted instantly.

3. Soft deleting and retaining data before final deletion. Often the data should
   not be immediately erased from the database.

   > Example: A team admin can delete a team, but you want to have the ability
   > to easily reinstate their data, in case the admin changes their mind, or
   > the request was fradulent.

   > Example: A user can leave a team and later rejoin it, reacquiring
   > attribution to data that was previously connected to them.

## Default deletion behavior

Without any additional configuration, ents and their edges are deleted
immediately. We'll also refer to this as "hard" deleted.

If the edge is required, as is the case for 1:many and 1:1 edges for the
[ents storing the edge as a field](/schema#understanding-how-edges-are-stored),
the ents on the other side of the edge are deleted as well.

The following scenarios are currently supported:

- 1:1 edge between ent A and ent B, ents A store the edge.
  - When ent A is deleted, only _it_ is deleted.
  - When ent B is deleted, the ent A connected to it is deleted as well (which
    might cause more edge and ent deletions).
- 1:many edge between ent A and ent B, ents A store the edge.
  - When ent A is deleted, only _it_ is deleted.
  - When ent B is deleted, ents A connected to it are deleted as well (which
    might cause more edge and ent deletions).
- many:many edge between ent A and ent B.
  - When ent A is deleted, the documents storing the edges to ents B are all
    deleted, but ents B are _not_ deleted.
  - When ent B is deleted, the documents storing the edges to ents A are all
    deleted, but ents A are _not_ deleted.

### Overriding deletion direction for 1:1 edges

For 1:1 edges, you can additionally configure deletion to propagate from the ent
that stores the edge to the other ent, by setting the `deletion` option on the
edge declaration:

```ts
defineEntSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edge("profile", { optional: true }),
  profiles: defineEnt({
    bio: v.string(),
  }).edge("user", { deletion: "hard" }),
});
```

In this example, when a user is deleted, their profile is deleted as well, which
is the default behavior, but also when a profile is deleted, the user is
deleted.

This is especially useful for cascading deletes to file storage, see [File
Storage].

## Soft deletion behavior

You can configure an ent to use the `"soft"` deletion behavior with the
`deletion` method in your schema:

```ts
defineSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).deletion("soft"),
});
```

This behavior adds a `deletionTime` field to the ent. When the ent itself is
"deleted", via the `delete` method, the `deletionTime` field is set to the
current server time.

If the ent is being deleted as a result of cascading hard deletion, it is hard
deleted.

You can include or exclude soft deleted ents from results by filtering.

### Undeleting soft deleted ents

The ents can be "undeleted" by unsetting the `deletionTime` field, for example:

```ts
await ctx.table("users").getX(userId).patch({ deletionTime: undefined });
```

### Soft edge deletion

#### 1:1 and 1:many edges

By default soft deletion doesn't propagate. You can configure cascading deletes
for soft deletions for individual 1:1 and 1:many edges via the `deletion` option
on edge declarations:

```ts
defineSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    email: v.string(),
  })
    .deletion("soft")
    .edges("profiles", { ref: true, deletion: "soft" }),

  profiles: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  })
    .deletion("soft")
    .edge("user"),
});
```

The ent on the other end of the edge has to have the `"soft"` deletion behavior.

In this example, when a user is deleted, it is soft deleted, and all its
profiles are also soft deleted immediately. When a profile itself is deleted, it
is also only soft deleted.

Soft deletion of edges happens immediately, within the same transaction.

<Aside title="What if an ent has too many 1:many edges to soft delete immediately?">

If an ent is connected to a large number of other ents, such that propagating
soft deletion to them all could fail the mutation, you should instead filter out
the soft deleted ents after traversing the edge.

</Aside>

#### many:many edges

Soft deletion doesn't affect many:many edges.

## Scheduled deletion behavior

The scheduled deletion behavior expands on the soft deletion behavior. The ent
is first immediately soft deleted. An actual hard deletion is then scheduled.

### Additional configuration

To enable scheduled ent deletion you need to add two lines of code to your
[`functions.ts` file](/setup/config):

```ts
// Add this import
import { scheduledDeleteFactory } from "convex-ents/deletion";

// Add this export
export const scheduledDelete = scheduledDeleteFactory(entDefinitions);
```

This will expose an internal Convex mutation used by `ctx.table` when scheduling
deletions.

<Aside title="Alternatively, you can configure the mutation explicitly">

Expose the mutation somewhere in your `convex` folder, and its reference to the
factory function:

```ts filename="convex/someFileName.ts"
import { scheduledDeleteFactory } from "convex-ents/deletion";
import { entDefinitions } from "./schema";

export const myNameForScheduledDelete = scheduledDeleteFactory(entDefinitions, {
  scheduledDelete: internal.someFileName.myNameForScheduledDelete,
});
```

Also pass the function's reference in `functions.ts` file, wherever you set up
your custom `mutation` and `internalMutation` function constructors:

```ts filename="convex/functions.ts" {14, 40-42, 52-54}
import {
  customCtx,
  customMutation,
  customQuery,
} from "convex-helpers/server/customFunctions";
import {
  query as baseQuery,
  mutation as baseMutation,
  internalQuery as baseInternalQuery,
  internalMutation as baseInternalMutation,
} from "./_generated/server";
import { entsTableFactory } from "convex-ents";
import { entDefinitions } from "./schema";
import { internal } from "./_generated/api";

export const query = customQuery(
  baseQuery,
  customCtx(async (ctx) => {
    return {
      table: entsTableFactory(ctx, entDefinitions),
      db: undefined,
    };
  }),
);

export const internalQuery = customQuery(
  baseInternalQuery,
  customCtx(async (ctx) => {
    return {
      table: entsTableFactory(ctx, entDefinitions),
      db: undefined,
    };
  }),
);

export const mutation = customMutation(
  baseMutation,
  customCtx(async (ctx) => {
    return {
      table: entsTableFactory(ctx, entDefinitions, {
        scheduledDelete: internal.someFileName.myNameForScheduledDelete,
      }),
      db: undefined,
    };
  }),
);

export const internalMutation = customMutation(
  baseInternalMutation,
  customCtx(async (ctx) => {
    return {
      table: entsTableFactory(ctx, entDefinitions, {
        scheduledDelete: internal.someFileName.myNameForScheduledDelete,
      }),
      db: undefined,
    };
  }),
);
```

</Aside>

### Defining scheduled deletion behavior

You can configure an ent to use the `"scheduled"` deletion behavior with the
`deletion` method in your schema:

```ts
defineSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    email: v.string(),
  })
    .deletion("scheduled")
    .edges("profiles", { ref: true }),

  profiles: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edge("user"),
});
```

When the ent is deleted, it is first soft deleted.
[Soft edge deletion](#soft-edge-deletion) can apply as well. This all happens
within the same mutation.

The hard deletion is scheduled to a separate mutation/mutations. Cascading
deletes are performed first, then the ent itself is hard deleted. There is no
guarantee on how long this can take, as it depends on the number of documents
that need to be deleted to finish the cascading deletion.

The hard deletion can be delayed into the future with the `delayMs` option:

```ts
defineSchema({
  users: defineEnt({
    email: v.string(),
  })
    .deletion("scheduled", { delayMs: 24 * 60 * 60 * 1000 })
    .edges("profiles", { ref: true }),

  profiles: defineEnt({
    name: v.string(),
  }).edge("user"),
});
```

In this example the user ent is soft deleted first, then after 24 hours its
profiles and the user itself are hard deleted.

The delay is only applied if the ent is itself being deleted, not when it is
being deleted as a result of a cascading delete.

### Canceling scheduled deletion

You can cancel a scheduled deletion by unsetting the `deletionTime` field, for
example:

```ts
await ctx.table("users").getX(userId).patch({ deletionTime: undefined });
```

### Correctness

You should make sure that while a scheduled hard deletion is running, there are
no new ents being inserted that would also be eligible for the same cascading
deletion.

You can do this by checking for the soft deletion state of the deleted ent in
your code.
